niśamayya tavātha yānavārtāṃ bhṛśamārtā: paśupālabālikāstā: |
kimidaṃ kimidaṃ kathaṃ nvitīmā: samavetā: paridevitānyakurvan ||1||
niśamayya	hearing
tava-atha	(of) Thy, then
yāna-vārtām	departure news
bhṛśam-ārtā:	very much saddened
paśupāla-bālikā:-tā:	the cowherd girls, they
kim-idaṃ kim-idaṃ	what is this, what is this
kathaṃ nu-iti-	how is this, thus
imā: samavetā:	these (girls) gathered
paridevitāni-	lamentations
akurvan	doing
Then hearing the news of Thy impending departure the cowherd girls were very much saddened. They gathered together and lamented saying -'What is this? How and why is this happening?'
karuṇānidhireṣa nandasūnu: kathamasmān visṛjedananyanāthā: |
bata na: kimu daivamevamāsīditi tāstvadgatamānasā vilepu: ||2||
karuṇā-nidhi:-	the compassion repository
eṣa nanda-sūnu:	this Nanda's son
katham-asmān-	how come us
visṛjet-ananyanāthā:	forsake, who do not have any other support
bata na: kimu	Alas our what
daivam-evam-āsīt-	fate of this kind was
iti tā:-	thus they
tvat-gata-mānasā	in Thee fixed hearted
vilepu:	bemoaned
The abode of compassion, Nanda's son, Krishna, how can he forsake us, who have no other support, except him. Alas what kind of fate do we have.' The girls with their hearts fixed on Thee bemoaned.
caramaprahare pratiṣṭhamāna: saha pitrā nijamitramaṇḍalaiśca |
paritāpabharaṃ nitambinīnāṃ śamayiṣyan vyamuca: sakhāyamekam ||3||
carama-prahare	in the last part (of night)
pratiṣṭhamāna:	leaving
saha pitrā	with (Thy) father
nija-mitra-maṇḍalai:-ca	and with his friends' groups
paritāpa-bharaṃ	of the sorrowful
nitambinīnāṃ	beauties (Gopikas)
śamayiṣyan	to assuage
vyamuca:	sent
sakhāyam-ekam	one friend
Thou were to leave with Thy father and a group of his friends in the last lap of the night. Thou sent one of Thy companions to the beautiful Gopikas who were very sorrowful, to assuage their grief.
acirādupayāmi sannidhiṃ vo bhavitā sādhu mayaiva saṅgamaśrī: |
amṛtāmbunidhau nimajjayiṣye drutamityāśvasitā vadhūrakārṣī: ||4||
acirāt-upayāmi	very soon (I) will come back
sannidhiṃ va:	near you all
bhavitā sādhu	(and) will be good (many)
mayā-eva	with me only
saṅgama-śrī:	meetings happy
amṛta-ambunidhau	in the nectar ocean
nimajjayiṣye	I shall immerse you
drutam-iti-āśvāsitā:	soon, thus consolations
vadhū:-akārṣī:	to the girls did give
I shall come back near you very soon. You will have many good and happy meetings with me. I will soon immerse you in the nectar of bliss ocean.' Thus Thou gave consolations to the girls.
saviṣādabharaṃ sayācñamuccai: atidūraṃ vanitābhirīkṣyamāṇa: |
mṛdu taddiśi pātayannapāṅgān sabalo'krūrarathena nirgato'bhū: ||5||
saviṣādabharaṃ	with great sorrow
sayācñam-	begging
uccai:-atidūram	loudly till far
vanitābhi:-	by the women's
īkṣyamāṇa:	following glances
mṛdu tat-diśi	gently in that direction
pātayan-	casting
apāṅgān	sidelong glances
sabala:-	with Balaraama
akrūra-rathena	in Akrura's chariot
nirgata:-abhū:	departed
The women followed Thee till far loudly and piteously begging and gazing with entreating eyes. Thou cast soft sidelong glances in that direction and departed with Balaraama in Akrura's chariot.
anasā bahulena vallavānāṃ manasā cānugato'tha vallabhānām |
vanamārtamṛgaṃ viṣaṇṇavṛkṣaṃ samatīto yamunātaṭīmayāsī: ||6||
anasā bahulena	by carts many
vallavānāṃ manasā	(and) by the Gopikaa's minds
ca-anugata:-atha	being followed then
vallabhānām	by the Gopas
vanam-ārtamṛgam	the forests with the sorrowful animals
viṣaṇṇa-vṛkṣam	and the sad trees
samatīta:	crossed
yamunā-taṭīm-	and the banks of Yamunaa
ayāsī:	reached
Many carts with Gopas followed Thee as also the minds and thoughts of the Gopikas. Thou crossed the forest with sorrowful animals and sad trees and reached the banks of the Yamunaa river.
niyamāya nimajya vāriṇi tvāmabhivīkṣyātha rathe'pi gāndineya: |
vivaśo'jani kiṃ nvidaṃ vibhoste nanu citraṃ tvavalokanaṃ samantāt ||7||
niyamāya nimajya	for (the daily) duties bathing
vāriṇi tvām	in the waters (of Jamunaa), Thee
abhivīkṣya-atha	seeing then
rathe-api	on the chariot also
gāndineya:	Gaandinee (Akrura)
vivaśa:-ajani	helpless became
kim nu-idam	what indeed is this
vibho:-te	O Lord Thy
nanu citraṃ tu-	indeed wonder but
avalokanam	being seen
samantāt	from everywhere
Akrura, the son of Gaandini was bathing in the waters of the river to perform his daily duties. He saw Thee in the water and also saw Thee on the chariot. He was overwhelmed with wonder and became helpless as to what it all was. But is there any wonder in Thy being seen from everywhere as Thou are omnipresent!
punareṣa nimajya puṇyaśālī puruṣaṃ tvāṃ paramaṃ bhujaṅgabhoge |
arikambugadāmbujai: sphurantaṃ surasiddhaughaparītamāluloke ||8||
puna:-eṣa	again this (Akrura)
nimajya	dipping (in the waters)
puṇyaśālī	(this) meritorious one,
puruṣaṃ tvāṃ paramaṃ	Being Thee Supreme,
bhujaṅga-bhoge	on the serpent's body
ari-kambu-gadā-ambujai:	with the discus, conch, mace and lotus
sphurantaṃ	resplendent
sura-siddha-augha-parītaṃ	by gods and siddhaas' groups surrounded
āluloke	(he) saw
Akrura again took a dip in the water. The meritorious and fortunate man that he was, he saw Thee The Supreme Being reclining on the Shesha serpent's body bed, resplendent and adorned with the discus, conch, mace and lotus. Thou were surrounded by groups of gods and various siddhaas.
sa tadā paramātmasaukhyasindhau vinimagna: praṇuvan prakārabhedai: |
avilokya punaśca harṣasindhoranuvṛttyā pulakāvṛto yayau tvām ||9||
sa tadā	he then
paramātma-saukhya-sindhau	in the supreme bliss ocean
vinimagna: praṇuvan	immersed (and) praising
prakāra-bhedai:	in different ways (of Saguna and Nirguna)
avilokya	not seeing Thee
puna:-ca	and again
harṣa-sindho:-	in the bliss ocean
anuvṛttyā	continuing to be
pulaka-āvṛta:	with horripilation all over
yayau tvām	went to Thee
He was then immersed in the ocean of supreme bliss and sang the praises unto Thy Saguna and Nirguna forms. Even as Thy vision disappeared, he continued to experience the unlimited bliss and with horripilations all over his body, he went to Thee.
kimu śītalimā mahān jale yat pulako'sāviti coditena tena |
atiharṣaniruttareṇa sārdhaṃ rathavāsī pavaneśa pāhi māṃ tvam ||10||
kimu śītalimā	is it cool
mahān jale yat	very much in the water so that
pulaka:-asau-	horripilation this
iti coditena	thus asked
tena ati-harṣa-	(with) him (because of) extreme bliss
niruttareṇa	speechless
sārdham rathavāsī	with (him, Akrura) seated on the chariot
pavaneśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
pāhi māṃ tvam	save me Thou
Thou asked him if the water was so cold that he had horripilation on his body, as if not knowing the cause. Akrura was speechless because he was immersed in extreme bliss. Thou sitting with him on the chariot, O Lord of Guruvaayur! Do save me.